Digital Security &amp; Source Protection for Journalists
========

***Acknowledgements***  
*This paper is the product of countless conversations, encounters,
recommendations and insights provided to me over the past year by
members of the digital security and journalism communities.*  

*Though it would be impossible to name everyone whose insight and
expertise has informed this work, my deepest thanks go to Franzi
Roesner, Carey Shenkman, Nabiha Syed, Seamus Tuohy, Chris Walker and
Carol Waters for providing invaluable feedback and direction on early
versions of this paper; your expertise and insight was invaluable. Also
to Oktavia Jonsdottir, Scott Klein, Quinn Norton, Jeremy Singer-Vine and
Jennifer Valentino-DeVries, who shared their ideas and work processes
with me. And a very special thanks to Peter G. Neumann, who offered me
the long view on digital security and directed me to essential resources
and experts on the subject.*  

*This project would also not have been possible without the financial
and intellectual support of my colleagues at Columbia Journalism School,
and the Tow Center for Digital Journalism–particularly Emily Bell and
Taylor Owen. Likewise, I am very grateful to both OpenITP and
TacticalTech–organizations whose generosity in hosting me in the fall of
2013 made possible so many enlightening interactions with the digital
security community. Without the openness of these organizations and
their associates, this work would not have been possible.*  

*And finally, many grateful thanks to my talented, enthusiastic, and
insightful illustrator and collaborator, Matteo Farinella, for truly
making the invisible, visible.*  

*First printing, <span>June 2014</span>*

*Funded by the Tow Foundation  
and the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation*

 

*This paper is dedicated to all members of the digital security and
journalism communities, whose shared commitment to transparency,
skepticism towards power, and dedication to informing and empowering
individuals everywhere has been an inspiration. I hope that this will be
only the first of many collaborations between our equally scrappy,
resilient, and adaptive professions. *

Preamble
========

In August of 2011, the United Kingdom experienced a wave of riots that
swept across the country. The first of these took place in the Tottenham
neighborhood of London, where local resident Mark Duggan had recently
been shot and killed by police. Within hours, riots had erupted in
cities around the United Kingdom, from Manchester to Bristol, in
neighborhoods and communities with no obvious connection to the events
that took place in Tottenham. Violence, vandalism, and understandable
panic gripped the nation. In the midst of these events, the
*Guardian*–led by Simon Rogers, founder and current editor of the
Datablog–engaged in what might best be described as a real-time
investigative-reporting effort to cover not only the where, when, and
what of these riots, but also their why and
how<sup>[1](footnotes/README.html)</sup>. Using social media reports, as
well as court records, extensive data analysis, and on-the-ground
reporting, the *Guardian* eventually built the story of how these riots
occurred and spread: largely through coordination efforts facilitated by
digital communications. Though the *Guardian*’s analysis would
eventually reveal–counter to the claims of Prime Minister David
Cameron–that Twitter and Facebook had played no role in spreading the
mayhem,<sup>[2](footnotes/README.html)</sup> the rioters had made
extensive use of BlackBerry Instant Messenger service to coordinate
their activities. While the *Guardian*’s analysis was sufficient to
derail Cameron’s call for a “red button” for social media, RIM–the
company that then ran BlackBerry–chose to cooperate with UK police,
turning over the messages and handles related to the
events.<sup>[3](footnotes/README.html)</sup> The next month in New York,
the Occupy Wall Street movement would lead to its own set of arrests,
followed by the NYPD’s courtroom pursuit of Malcolm Harris’s Twitter
“metadata”–especially information about the location of his phone when
he posted certain tweets.<sup>[4](footnotes/README.html)</sup> Even when
Twitter attempted to *resist* cooperating with
police,<sup>[5](footnotes/README.html)</sup> they were eventually forced
to turn over Harris’ data anyway.<sup>[6](footnotes/README.html)</sup>
These events threw into sharp relief the realities of privacy in the
realm of digital communications: Whether messages were privately sent or
publicly shared, users of services like BlackBerry Instant Messenger and
Twitter had few enforceable rights around the information they
communicated through these services, or even around information that the
services had *about* them. Somehow, the evolution of digital
communication systems had given rise to a strange class of information
known as “metadata”: the data *about* data that can seemingly reveal
almost everything about anyone, and yet, simultaneously, belongs to no
one at all.