Digital Security for Journalists:A 21st Century Imperative
==========================================================

In the spring of 2013, *Guardian* reporter Glenn Greenwald received a
set of classified documents from a former NSA employee who would later
be revealed as Edward Snowden. Among the leaked documents eventually
published by both the *Guardian* and the *Washington Post* were some
revealing that the United States’ National Security Agency had for some
time been performing bulk collection of digital communications metadata
records, allegedly from corporations ranging from U.S. telecom companies
to digital service providers like Google and Yahoo.
<sup>[7](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> Though met with public outrage,
the response of U.S. lawmakers to these revelations was decidedly
measured: Not only was the program in question legal, but these
collection practices had been taking place for some time.

 > “As far as I know, this is the exact three-month renewal of what has
been the case for the past seven years,” [said
Feinstein](http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2013/06/06/transcript-dianne-feinstein-saxby-chambliss-explain-defend-nsa-phone-records-program/).

 Nevertheless, continued reporting by the *Guardian* and the *Washington
Post*–for which they would both eventually win a Pulitzer
Prize–indicated a heretofore unconfirmed fact: that the digital
communications systems that many Americans believed to be importantly
private were, in fact, anything but.

The shocking nature of the Snowden revelations catapulted Greenwald to
the center of the ongoing debate about the future of journalism. In
October of 2013, Bill Keller, former managing editor of the *New York
Times*, invited Greenwald to debate their views on the essential
principles of journalism in the 21st century in his *Times* newspaper
column.<sup>[8](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> Yet while Keller and
Greenwald’s exchange in that column did highlight their philosophical
differences, it glossed some of the practical ones that were arguably no
less significant to the story: Snowden took his documents to Laura
Poitras and Glenn Greenwald in part because they could meet his
communication-security requirements.

In the past 15 years, digital publishing and communications have changed
the landscape–and even the nature–of journalism in innumerable ways. Old
business models have collapsed, and are yet to be reasonably replaced.
Private individuals and citizen journalists have access to the same
platforms for publication and can cultivate the same profile as
reporters at major news organizations. The power of the crowd can be
used both to document and condemn. <sup>[9](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup>
And yet every corner of our industry–from fashion to finance, the
national desk to national security–is still driven by a single,
essential imperative: Get the story.

There are no stories without sources. Unless researchers, executives,
parents, politicians, religious figures, heads of state, whistleblowers,
and widowers–unless *people*–are willing to share information with
journalists, our profession cannot function. Whether what they share
with us is a trove of secret documents, the location of a meeting, or
the story of a loved one lost, without them journalism as we know it
ceases to exist. And yet the missing acknowledgment in Keller and
Greenwald’s debate was exactly this: that a perhaps fundamental
difference in their journalism was a question of neither form nor
philosophy, but of capacity. Greenwald and his colleagues were able to
offer Snowden the digital protections he demanded. How many of today’s
practicing journalists, independent or institutional, can effectively do
the same?

That certain professional practices are essential not just to the
integrity but the viability of the journalistic enterprise is already
codified into our professional practice. Libel training and editorial
review help protect journalists and their institutions from debilitating
lawsuits. Reputable news organizations have articulated codes of conduct
designed to sharply limit the personal benefit reporters may derive from
their professional activities; many also have explicit conflict of
interest surveys that reporters must file on a regular
basis.<sup>[10](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> And yet in many newsrooms,
the consideration given to the systematic protection of our most
valuable assets–our sources–is uneven at best.

There can be little dispute at this point that journalism, even within
the United States, is under legal and technical
attack.<sup>[11](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> The year 2013 saw
virtually unprecedented criminal charges leveled against both
journalists and their sources. In some cases, members of the press have
been forced to risk jail time to defend their sources; in others, they
never had the chance.<sup>[12](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> And major
news organizations

 > e.g. [The New York Times, Washington Post,
Bloomberg](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/02/technology/washington-posts-joins-list-of-media-hacked-by-the-chinese.html),
[Wall Street
Journal](http://www.nytimes.com/2013/02/01/technology/wall-street-journal-reports-attack-by-china-hackers.html?ref=technology)

 have acknowledged repeated hacking attempts on their systems, at least
some of which are known to be direct efforts to uncover sources. Major
communications companies have also acknowledged that [a significant
proportion of digital hacking targets are
journalists](http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-26786593).

Whatever the dollar cost of a lawsuit or a system recovery, the
detriment that these events pose to our industry is incalculable. At the
same time that Snowden’s conscious choice to share his information with
recognized journalists may inspire confidence in the continued
importance of professional journalism, the difficulties he experienced
in doing so securely<sup>[13](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> point to a
significant deficiency in our existing practices. Moreover, his very
revelations only confirm how thin is the veil that protects our digital
communications from the eyes of others, whether they be governments’,
lawyers’, service providers’, or hackers’. As this understanding rightly
permeates the public consciousness, the chilling effects will be
immeasurable.

In order to maintain the confidence of–and therefore the access to–our
sources, it is imperative that the journalistic profession as a whole
develops a coherent set of professional practices around their
protection. While judicial decisions and statutes in 49 states and the
District of Columbia provide some form of reportorial
“privilege,”<sup>[14](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> the legal and
technical realities of digital communications systems today are such
that many journalists will never have the opportunity to invoke it.

For robust journalistic security practices to be effective, they must
both offer the real protections that sources deserve and be reasonable
enough to integrate into the process of newsgathering and publication.
To achieve these ends, any approach must be grounded in a fundamental
understanding of the technical and legal frameworks in which our digital
communications exist, and how their sometimes strange intersections
influence the way that journalists must operate. The goal of this paper
is to provide a coherent and salient introduction to these frameworks,
as a foundation for developing supportable security practices for the
journalism industry.

The genesis of this research stems directly from recent events: the
*Associated Press* phone records scandal and the Snowden revelations
that took place in the spring of 2013. Though I came to this topic
well-versed in the basics of digital communication technologies, my
collaborative development of a mobile application for secure, anonymous,
authenticated communication had made me acutely aware that creating
better tools for secure digital communications was only a part of the
problem, and I was happy to leave the job of offering practical digital
security advice to those with more experience than I. Yet as I reviewed
existing guides and recommendations, I found that few of these resources
were comprehensive in their discussions of the “when” and “why” of
digital security. This is with good reason. There is no such thing as
generic “security”, and even when contextualized, its practices must
effectively navigate any number of legal and technical pitfalls.

As I began this work, I spoke anecdotally with journalism colleagues who
employed secure digital communication technologies in their work. In the
process, the first outlines of a pattern began to emerge. Those who
understood and applied digital security practices to their reporting,
even occasionally, were either themselves covering sensitive topic areas
like the NSA–and therefore came to these understandings of professional
necessity–or, like me, they had a sufficiently technical background to
parse these topics for themselves. This paper strives to provide an
accessible level of technical and legal understanding for the broader
journalism community, so that as an industry we can begin to have an
informed conversation about how the realities of today’s digital
communications systems should be appropriately addressed within our
work.

The remainder of this paper is organized into four sections. First and
second, I present overviews of the current state of law and technology
as they exist in and shape the realities of digital communications,
privacy, and security with a focus on the needs of source protection for
journalists. Third, I present some models for conceptualizing and
implementing digital communications practices for journalists and
newsrooms, in the context of current tools and communities. Finally, I
offer recommendations for both industry development and academic
research in the areas of digital privacy and security.

### Interlude: Addressing Complexity

The difficulty of creating simple models to describe digital security
risks and solutions stems from the fact that they must operate at the
place where two major social systems–whose properties are almost
perfectly juxtaposed–intersect. First, there is the law, which is
intentionally slow, exhaustive, cautious, and reactive. Then, there is
technology, which is inherently fast, emergent, experimental, and
constructive. And while our lives are shaped by both of them on a daily
basis, their inner workings remain almost entirely invisible to all but
the most highly initiated.

The crafting of laws and rendering of legal decisions often hinge on the
byzantine interleaving of statutes, case law, and judicial inference
that is argued in courts and described in documents away from the public
view, and ultimately codified as binary decisions on the particulars of
a given case. Technologies, meanwhile, exemplify the unpredictably
complex expression of equally binary decision trees as they interact
with the human world, yet their public form is often intentionally not
readable by humans. The result is that nearly all of the workings of
both systems are inaccessible to the public, expressed as they are in
coded language and housed on largely proprietary systems.

In a healthy democratic society, the collective effect of citizens’
individual actions in the political, economic, and social spheres
constitute cultural “forces of nature.” In this ecosystem, individual
technologies are like cultivars–while their general features are known,
their ultimate forms and behaviors are inextricably tied to their
interaction with the broader environment. Law, meanwhile, is the
“gardener” of that environment, and its role is necessarily reactionary
and unequivocal. Prune here, thin there, tie back some stems and add
support to others. Law does not determine what technologies come into
being, and only once a “species” is known can law attempt to proactively
influence its characteristics. As law and technology react and respond
to one another, they create an ecosystem whose state is both dynamic and
unpredictable. In order to be successful, digital security practices
must be adaptive enough to acclimate to the changing circumstances of
this *emergent system*.

Fortunately, our worlds are comprised almost entirely of similarly
emergent systems–from the flow of traffic to the workings of party
politics–and all of us capably navigate untold numbers of them in the
course of our daily lives. The main difference between these and our
digital communications systems is that most of these others operate
largely in the visible and/or physical world, and follow rules that are
accessible to us. The key, therefore, to creating a set of principles
that supports journalistic values within digital communications systems
is to make these systems at least conceptually “visible,” and to
translate the rules by which they operate into language that is broadly
accessible to our community.

### Digital Security is Not Sui Generis

In the physical world, we accept that privacy and security are context
dependent. We appreciate that jaywalking is generally less safe than
crossing at a stoplight, that postcards and loud public telephone
conversations are less private than sealed letters and whispered
exchanges. If we latch our yard gate, we do so knowing it will probably
not stop a determined criminal, but may deter an opportunistic one. We
know our front door deadbolt will not stop a SWAT team, but may delay an
intruder long enough for our loved ones to escape to safety. An alarm
system cannot extinguish a fire, but it may alert professionals to an
emergency.

We are able to make informed judgments about our physical privacy and
security because the rules and assumptions of the systems they involve
are generally apparent and understandable to us. We also appreciate that
these judgments–and the choices we make on their basis–are inherently
probabilistic and imperfect. Crossing the street involves making
numerous estimates about the speed of traffic, one’s own crossing pace,
and even the conditions of the road. An incorrect estimate may put you
or those around you at substantial risk. Simiarly, a “shoulder surfer”
may read our email at a cafe; a fellow passenger on a train may read
documents we are holding. At all points we appreciate that neither our
security nor our privacy is absolute.

This is exactly the same appreciation we must develop in our
interactions with digital communications systems. As the forthcoming
sections illustrate, the digital world is subject to all of the same
complexities and probabilities as the physical one. And just as we have
all learned the skills necessary to cross the street safely despite
ever-changing road conditions, so too we can all learn to navigate the
digital world in a way that keeps our sources–and ourselves–safe. We
just need to learn how to look both ways.

