Challenges and Opportunities in Digital Security Technologies
------------------------------------------------------------

> [“‘Encryption works,’ said Snowden. The problem, in real life, is
> nothing that \*runs\* encryption
> works.”](https://twitter.com/quinnnorton/status/465377993918271488)  
> –Quinn Norton

The acknowledged usability of much digital-security software at the
moment could probably be best summarized as
“abysmal.”<sup>[52](footnotes/README.html)</sup> While less generally
true of mobile-based offerings–such as SilentCircle, Wickr, TextSecure
etc.–the difficulty of creating keys with GPG or installing Tails on a
USB drive is still prohibitive to most users. Setting up each of these
requires several steps and, often, some amount of risk to the user’s
computer if something goes wrong.

There are several reasons for this overall lack of usability. First and
foremost, many secure-communications projects lack the steady revenue
stream and well-defined user-base that are prerequisite for effective
usability testing and development. Many of the tools recommended here
are dependent on periodic government grants that do not prioritize
usability, and as the recent “Heartbleed” bug illustrated, the level of
donations to even widely used security libraries is often abysmally
low.<sup>[53](footnotes/README.html)</sup> The result is that many of
these tools are materially unusable, unstable, or unreliable– and they
are liable to disappear entirely if their funding is not renewed.

Yet it is these very challenges that also offer an opportunity for news
organizations to diversify their revenue streams. By partnering with
existing projects or building their own, large news companies can invest
in the development of secure digital tools specifically designed to meet
the needs of journalists and then sell or license those solutions to
other organizations.

To be clear, my suggestion is not that journalistic organizations begin
developing the kind of “black box” software produced by some commercial
security vendors; transparency is as essential to software development
as it is to journalism.<sup>[54](footnotes/README.html)</sup> As in
journalism, transparency in digital-security software is both an ethical
and a practical concern: either you must be able to see the code, trust
the community to validate the code, or trust the person who wrote it. If
you don’t know the code, you don’t know what it does.

Being able to “see the code,” however, does *not* require that the code
also be *free*. Though many of the security projects listed above are
both free and open source, alternative economic models are possible.
“Source available” software,<sup>[55](footnotes/README.html)</sup> for
example, makes the code available for review and even reuse in other
open-source projects, but commercial use or distribution requires a
license fee; the widely used
[MySQL](https://www.mysql.com/about/legal/licensing/oem/#4) employs this
type of dual-licensing. Alternatively, a service-and-support model,
similar to that offered by
[RedHat](http://www.redhat.com/about/subscription/) is another
possibility for generating revenue.