Digital Security: A Journalistic Essential for the 21st Century
---------------------------------------------------------------

> “It should be clear that unencrypted journalist-source communication
> is unforgivably reckless.”  
> –Edward Snowden<sup>[50](footnotes/README.html)</sup>

As Snowden, Greenwald, and Poitras’ experiences demonstrate, adopting
robust digital security measures has largely been the project of
individual journalists and personal networks. Even in large
organizations, these practices are often confined to a handful of
individuals who have preexisting technical knowledge or work with
sensitive sources or material.

This situation is inadequate for a number of reasons. At the individual
and organizational level, ad-hoc source protection is incompatible with
sensitive–and sometimes essential–reporting. Few organizations could
afford the kind of protracted legal battle James Risen has faced, yet
the alternative is either to abandon this coverage altogether or allow
sources to wither under an atmosphere of increasingly aggressive leak
prosecutions. Moreover, those doing sensitive reporting are not the only
targets for attack; for an adversary seeking to infiltrate a news
organization’s network–as experienced by Bloomberg, the *The New York
Times*, the *Wall Street Journal* and the *Washington Post*–any point of
entry will do. In this sense and others, digital source protection is a
“herd” protection. It works best–and, arguably, only truly works at
all–if everyone is doing it.