Implementing Digital Security At Scale
--------------------------------------

Integrating digital security practices into a newsroom workflow will
require concerted organizational effort. Editors will need to recognize
the importance of digital security in the reporting process, and honor
the scheduling implications it may entail. Reporters will need training
and technical support for new systems and software. At the highest
levels, implementing robust digital security practices will require an
institutional commitment both financially and culturally, wherein
noncompliance is not tolerated and privacy and security considerations
sit at the table alongside legal and editorial ones.

While not insurmountable, the complexities of operationalizing digital
security in a newsroom are certainly real. Likewise, it is unrealistic
to expect every journalist to become expert in all possible nuances of
digital security practice. Yet here is another sense in which digital
security is not *sui generis*. In its technical complexity and
importance to the industry, digital security is much like libel. Just as
news organizations expect that reporters and editors have a basic
literacy in libel considerations, so too should they assess and/or train
their reporters and editors in the essentials of digital security. And
just as news organizations retain experts to consult on particularly
thorny libel issues, they should have experts on hand to advise on
sensitive digital security measures where needed; some organizations
already do.<sup>[51](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> At a time when most
news organizations are overstretched and underfunded, the very idea of
adding yet another step to the reporting process or another employee to
the payroll may seem laughable, even cruel. Yet, as is often the case,
with new approaches also come new opportunities. Some of these are
financial, as I will discuss below. No less significant, however, are
the editorial opportunities. Reporters well-versed in digital security
practices will find themselves with a new array of skills for locating
and verifying sources and stories. They may even find themselves with
new sources altogether as their networks learn of their better security
practices.