Source Protection and More
--------------------------

The primary objective of this paper has been to provide an overview of
the legal and technical infrastructure that shapes the practical
requirements for source protection in the age of digital communications.
In the preceding section, I presented some tools and approaches for
protecting source communications in the context of the two primary use
cases for journalists: *linkable* and *unlinkable* sources. While the
above discussion is not exhaustive, evaluating source communications
within a framework of *linkability* does offer a valuable mechanism for
designing digital communication solutions for journalists.

Integrating the strategies discussed above into the current workflow of
journalism is no small task, and the suggestion to do so is not made
lightly. I do believe, however, that this integration is both necessary
and feasible, and will outline some possible approaches to it below.
Before elaborating on these further, however, it is worthwhile to
consider some of the additional advantages that these source-protection
methods offer to journalists and their organizations.

### Verification Protects Your Reputation

*Verification*–the process of confirming one’s ownership of a particular
digital identity–is an essential aspect of encrypted digital
communications. But verification has an additional value for
journalists–the ability to protect their reputations in the case that
one or more of their digital identities (e.g., email, Twitter, or
Facebook accounts) are compromised. Digital signatures, for example, can
be attached to emails whether they are encrypted or not, and, for all
practical purposes these signatures cannot be forged. If an account is
hacked remotely, the attacker will not be able to replicate the digital
signature, immediately tipping off any recipients that the communication
is not genuine. Likewise, one can message essential contacts from a new
account and they will be able to confirm it is really “you” by checking
the signature.

### Asymmetric Encryption Supports *True* Anonymity

Conversely, verification also supports the possibility of working with
*truly* anonymous sources. Over time, the handles and email accounts
used by such a source may change, but as long as the digital signature
remains consistent, one can be confident that the person (or, in some
cases, organization) on the other end of the exchange is the same.

 > On an organizational level, this can be achieved by implementing a
tool like [SecureDrop](https://pressfreedomfoundation.org/securedrop)

 Moreover, a source wishing to make secure contact can do so by
encrypting a message with the journalist’s public key. This message
could be an email or even a file that the journalist is directed to by
another means. Whether sent from a throwaway email address or posted
anonymously, that information will only be accessible to the journalist
for whom it was intended.
