Metadata: More Than Just Communications
---------------------------------------

Sending data over the Web isn’t the only way our information gets tagged
with metadata. Many cameras and camera phones attach data to photographs
about the time and location of a particular photograph, as well as the
equipment on which it was shot. This can be incredibly helpful for photo
editors, but dangerous for journalists and sources whom it can be used
to locate. Tools like
[InformaCam](https://guardianproject.info/informa/) encrypts the
metadata about photos on your phone, while
[ObscuraCam](https://guardianproject.info/apps/obscuracam/) lets you
blur out anyone (or anything) you need to. While computer-based software
to eliminate this metadata exists, a quick-fix for posting images to the
Web is simply to screengrab them and use the capture instead of the
original.

Documents, too, tend to contain metadata about who created them and when
(often drawn from your computer username or software registration
information), so avoid sharing text in formats that can contain “macros”

 > “Macro” is another term for a small program.

 (e.g., .doc/x or .pdf) where possible. Likewise, do some cleanup before
posting any original documents given to you by a source. Some
organizations have been known to use digital “watermarking” on sensitive
documents to trace leakers. This can take many forms, but can be as
subtle as giving each copy of the document slightly different typos and
formatting, so that if it appears somewhere the source can be
identified. Always discuss the implications with your editor, but
consider formatting and spellchecking any source documents before
posting to eliminate these patterns.