Protecting Your Keys and Accounts
---------------------------------

Creating unlinkable email accounts, verifying pseudonyms, and using
encryption to protect your communications doesn’t do any good if your
accounts get hacked or someone gets access to your private key, which is
why the heart of all good security practice is the use of strong, unique
passwords on all your accounts and on the software that protects your
private key.

On its surface, this recommendation seems simple enough, and it’s advice
that most of us have heard before. But in practice, it presents two
primary problems. First, what is a “strong” password? Where guidance is
offered (often along the lines of “must include at least one number and
one uppercase letter”), the results are often difficult to remember and
the actual “strength” is not clear. Meanwhile, sites that grade the
quality of the passwords we create are often opaque about *how* to
create good ones. In this scenario, we’re lucky to remember what we
typed by the time our entry receives a strong grade.

Fortunately, these issues have both digital and analog solutions, and
you can mix and match the strategies according to your preference. Since
at least some situations, however, will require that you remember your
password, we’ll start with simple recommendations for creating strong
and memorable passwords.

### Forget Pass*word*; Remember Pass*phrase*

The strength of a password comes is determined by two attributes: its
length and its complexity. Length, naturally, is the number of
characters; complexity relates to the randomness of those characters, in
terms of both order and type (e.g., punctuation, numbers, and uppercase
characters). Increase the strength of either (or both) characteristics
of your passwords enough, and you have a set of characters that would
take some number of centuries for a computer to figure out.

The trouble is that increasing complexity is both hard to do well–common
number-for-letter substitutions are well known by hackers–and makes
passwords hard to remember. Increasing length, on the other hand, is
very straightforward when you think in terms of *phrases* instead of
words.

Take, for example, your favorite quote from a television show or movie.
This is likely to be both pretty long (in terms of characters) and you
already have it memorized. As long its source isn’t associated with any
of your digital profiles and it isn’t a well-known “catch phrase,” it’s
probably a pretty good choice. Even better, pick a phrase or quotation
from your “guilty pleasure” canon–movies, television shows or songs you
don’t even like to admit you enjoy, so that even someone close to you
might not think to guess it. Longer phrases and irregular capitalization
help improve the strength of the password, meaning it will be pretty
tough to hack programmatically, as well as hard to
guess.<sup>[48](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup>

### Password Generators & Managers

There’s obviously no way for someone to steal a passphrase that only
lives in your memory, but trying to remember the dozen or more we may
need for all of our various devices and accounts can still be
overwhelming–leading to the risky temptation to use the same password in
multiple places.

A great way to deal with this is to use a password manager, like
[KeePass](http://keepass.info/) or [LastPass](https://lastpass.com/),
which stores your passwords (and can also create them for you) in an
encrypted file that you unlock with a master passphrase. KeePass is open
source and can be stored on a USB key; LastPass is cloud-based but
crucially only stores the encrypted file, so the service doesn’t have
access to any of your passwords.

In some cases, even writing a passphrase down on a piece of paper can be
suitable, as long as it’s kept in a both legally and physically secure
location, like a locked drawer in your desk at home. Obviously this
limits your access to them, but as long as the place it’s kept is yours
(so it can’t be searched without a warrant) and it’s not just lying
around, this is still a better approach than using weak passwords. Just
make sure never to carry it with you!