The Strategies: Source Protection and Digital Security
======================================================

### Preface: Beware the Buzzwords

Since the Snowden revelations of 2013, a seemingly endless supply of app
developers and service providers has emerged onto the online landscape
promising “private,” “anonymous,” and/or “secure” communications.
Despite the recent SnapChat
settlement,<sup>[41](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> however, companies’
use of these terms is unregulated and the terms themselves are generally
poorly defined.<sup>[42](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup> Yet in order to
meaningfully protect our digital communications, clarifying the nuances
of these terms is essential. We began that process in an earlier
section, where we exposed the legal concept of privacy to be importantly
limited to, among other things, information that has not been shared in
any way with a third party.

“Anonymity,” meanwhile, is a word that is often used as a catchall to
describe communications that may, in reality, be anonymous,
pseudonymous, or simply unpublished. In journalism, citing “anonymous”
sources is usually “a last
resort”<sup>[43](/digital-security-for-journalists/footnotes/README.html)</sup>, but such sources are
typically anything but: Their physical and/or legal identities are
likely well-known to the reporters and editors with whom they work.
“Pseudonymity,” meanwhile, describes any handle other than our direct
physical or legal identity. In this sense, all digital communications
are technically pseudonymous, whether or not we generally think of them
as such. Pseudonyms may be persistent or one-time use; an email address
of your legal name is a pseudonym as much as a throwaway Reddit account.
As we will see, however, the most important characteristic of an
effective pseudonym, for journalists and sources, is whether or not it
is *linkable* to its user’s physical or legal identity.

The concept of *linkability* is crucial precisely because, as discussed
above, it is what undermines the practical value of most current shield
protections for journalists. Though the concept of source protection is
often thought of as not “naming” your source, the reality is that the
defaults on most email, chat, text, and telephone systems do exactly
that with every exchange through the digital traces these activities
leave behind. The metadata records stored by service providers can so
efficiently link journalists to their sources that the authorities need
rarely make the effort to take journalists to court.

 > Though in Risen’s case the government argued that “[n]o other person
can <span>[identify]</span> Sterling as the individual who disclosed the
national defense information”, Risen’s grand jury subpoena was quashed
precisely *because* many [metadata records already linked him to
Sterling](https://archive.org/details/229733-judge-leonie-brinkemas-ruling-quashing-subpoena).

 This means that where protecting the identity of a source is truly
necessary, it is essential that these communications be *unlinkable*.

As we will see below, effective use of pseudonyms is an essential
component of achieving *unlinkability*. Yet pseudonyms themselves
present something of a conundrum: How can we know who really “owns” a
particular digital identity? This fundamental issue is one of the
reasons that so many of us have rushed to “claim” the email addresses
comprised of our legal names on major service providers, and why many
organizations follow a simple *firstname[dot]lastname[at]* pattern when
generating email addresses as well. These practices recognize the
problems of *authentication* and *verification* - determining who “owns”
an email address or telephone number. While we often assume that an
email address made up of someone’s legal name belongs to them, in
reality we also take steps to verify digital contact information, though
often without thinking about it: Someone gives us their email address at
an event, and we continue the in-person conversation digitally; we call
a phone number we’ve been given and the voice that answers sounds like
our friend or colleague; we arrange to meet someone via chat and the
person we expect shows up at the right place and time. In each case, we
use some kind of non-digital communication to verify that the person
using the email address, telephone number or chat handle is the same
person who provided it to us. In the digital world, this is often
described as “out of channel” or “out of band” verification, and it’s an
important aspect of using all digital pseudonyms, including the “public
keys” that we will discuss below. The complement to this process,
meanwhile, is *authentication,* where someone proves to us–through their
physical self or voice–that they are who they claim to be. If
authenticating a person’s identity ourselves isn’t possible, then we
have to rely on the word of someone we trust.

Of course, the easiest part of protecting our information–whether it’s
footage, photographs, notes or a source list–is through a strong
password practice. As we’ll see in more detail below, the simplest way
to do this is simply to stop thinking pass*word* and start thinking
pass*phrase*. This makes for logins that are both easier to remember and
harder to crack.