The Judicial View of Privacy: The Fourth Amendment and Third-Party Doctrine
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Over the course of many decades, the character of the American “right to
privacy” has been both enshrined and circumscribed by the nature of the
space in which an object or activity exists, and the process through
which information about those activities is obtained. Individuals’
“persons, houses, papers and effects” constitute private realms that
should not be intruded upon by the government except in the presence of
probable cause and the issuance of a warrant; where a space–either
virtual or physical–is shared with others, its “public” character
dictates that no right to privacy exists. This dichotomy is sometimes
expressed via the shorthand: “No right to privacy in public.”

Over time, the Supreme Court has occasionally interpreted and expanded
the list of realms deemed “private,” and therefore safe from unwarranted
search. It was in the 1967 case *Katz v. United States* that Justice
Harlan, in a concurring opinion, [coined the term “reasonable
expectation of
privacy”](http://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/389/347#writing-USSC_CR_0389_0347_ZC1)
that has largely come to represent the popular understanding of a
constitutional right to privacy. At issue in *Katz* was law
enforcement’s placement of a recording device on a public telephone
booth, through which it captured the contents of the defendant’s end of
a phone conversation. In ruling for the defendant, the Court held that
the Fourth Amendment protected [“people, not
places.”](http://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/389/347#writing-USSC_CR_0389_0347_ZO)
Harlan’s same concurring opinion asserted that “electronic, as well as
physical, intrusion into a place…may constitute a violation of the
Fourth Amendment.”

Yet the protections of *Katz* are highly circumscribed. Importantly, the
contents of the conversation obtained in *Katz* were procured directly
from the defendant himself by recording his own words. This makes Katz a
“first party” to the content of the search, which is required for a
Fourth Amendment claim. Because of this crucial detail, the ruling in
*Katz* has little bearing on situations where information has been
knowingly shared with others.

 > Though in *[U.S. v
Warshak](http://www.ca6.uscourts.gov/opinions.pdf/10a0377p-06.pdf)*
(2010), the Sixth Circuit asserted the defendants’ privacy interest in
the contents of their emails, the law supporting the search has not
proven unconstitutional.


In 1976, this distinction was reinforced in *United States v. Miller*,
wherein the court held that there can be no expectation of privacy
around information–in this case, financial–that an individual [has
“voluntarily conveyed and…exposed” to a third
party](http://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/425/435#writing-type-1-Powell)
when he or she is aware that it may be shared with still others “in the
ordinary course of business.” Three years later, the court cited the
*Miller* decision in *Smith v. Maryland*, which [affirmed law
enforcement’s right to obtain the numbers dialed by an individual when
placing a telephone
call](http://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/442/735), on the
basis that “telephone users…typically know that the numbers they dial
are transmitted to the phone company and recorded.” Under this rubric,
which still applies today, telephone users have no “expectation of
privacy” around the numbers they dial, even from a home telephone.

Together, the rulings in *Miller* and *Smith* help form the basis of
what is broadly termed the “third-party doctrine” in American judicial
proceedings, which holds that any information shared with a third party
is not “private” with respect to the Fourth Amendment. As will be
discussed below, only in cases where “privilege” has been established
around a particular relationship (such as those with a doctor, lawyer,
or, in some jurisdictions, a journalist) is there an exception to this
general rule of thumb. Outside of such circumstances, *Miller* asserts,
[citizens should expect that any time they voluntarily expose
information to a company or its
equipment](http://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/425/435#writing-type-1-Powell)
there is “the risk that the company would share that information with
the police.” Though discussed in terms of privacy, it is worth noting
that the decisions in *Katz*, *Miller* and *Smith* still hinge
fundamentally on the Fourth Amendment’s protection against “unreasonable
search”: Thus the core of the reasoning relates not to what was
obtained, but how it was obtained. In *Katz*, the “search” of the
defendant’s conversation was made on his own person, whereas in *Miller*
and *Smith* the search was of the defendants’ financial institution and
telephone service provider, respectively. The “reasonableness” of the
search is therefore evaluated with respect to the rights of the
organization in question, not the account holder(s), regardless of
whether the search reveals information that pertains to them. Similar
reasoning led to the [2012 decision in *United States v.
Graham*](http://www.ca4.uscourts.gov/opinions/Published/095067.p.pdf) ,
which held that “historical cell site” data–the telecommunication
providers’ records of the cell towers to which a subscriber’s phone has
connected–is not protected by the Fourth Amendment.