The Legislative View of Privacy: ECPA & FISA
--------------------------------------------

### The Electronic Communications and Privacy Act (ECPA)

In the decades since the decisions in *Miller* and *Katz*, bank
transactions and telephone digits have become only two of the many types
of metadata generated by the digital communications systems used by the
public on a regular basis. And while the Supreme Court’s rulings
indicate that there is no constitutional right to privacy around this
metadata, this in no way limits the ability of Congress to pass laws
expanding individuals’ privacy rights around these records. This fact
has led to several pieces of legislation doing just that, including The
Right to Financial Privacy Act ([12 U.S.C.
§3401](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/12/chapter-35)), Video
Privacy Protection Act([18 U.S.C.
§2710](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/2710)) and HIPAA ([42
C.F.R. §403.812](http://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/42/403.812)).

Some of the earliest, and still most relevant, legislation in this area
is the [Electronic Communications Privacy Act
(ECPA)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/part-I/chapter-119) of
1986, which defines the classes of metadata that telephone and
electronic service providers may be compelled to share with law
enforcement. Though successful in enhancing privacy protections in the
context of real-time telephone wiretapping, ECPA was written at a time
before email was commonplace, and when electronic storage costs were
high and local-only access was the norm. The result is that while it
remains the primary piece of legislation that governs data collection
and sharing requirements for electronic communications today, the
application of its provisions to both wired and wireless mobile
communications, as well as online services, seems to expose more than it
protects.

Crucially, the Stored Communications Act [(18 U.S.C.
§2701-12)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/part-I/chapter-121)
portion of ECPA, and, in particular, its “Required Disclosure Of
Customer Communications or Records” provision [(18 U.S.C.
§2703)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/2703), enumerates the
data points that service providers must turn over to law enforcement
when provided with a subpoena.

 > With the exception of [18 U.S.C.
§2703(d)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/2703), which
requires some showing before a judge. Both are less stringent than the
“probable cause” required to obtain a warrant.

 As enumerated in section (c)(2), this information includes:

In the context of the technologies then prevalent, the metadata that
ECPA makes available to law enforcement was not nearly as revealing of
citizens’ day-to-day activities as it is currently. According to recent
research, reviewing even the relatively broad locational data accessible
via GPS can illustrate an individual’s movements and activities beyond
what would be meaningfully feasible via physical surveillance. The
“mosaic theory” concludes that “comprehensive aggregation of even
seemingly innocuous data reveals greater insight than consideration of
each piece of information in
isolation.”<sup>[15](footnotes/README.html)</sup> Yet because we may
“voluntarily share” our GPS location (and even more fine-grained
cell-site) data by virtue of our service contract with a provider, this
information is not considered private. A similar circumstance is created
when we surf the Web, as our Internet protocol (IP) address is shared
with virtually every website we visit.

 > For more detail, see the next chapter.

The implications of ECPA are not limited to metadata, however. Section
(a) of the “Required Disclosure” clause discussed above provides that
contents of “electronic communications” in electronic storage that are
more than 180 days old may be obtained by law enforcement via an
administrative subpoena. Although the act explicitly exempts from the
definition of “electronic communications” the kind of oral, tone-based,
GPS and financial data that in 1986 constituted most of the general
public’s phone calls and wire transfers, it explicitly *includes* any
“transfer of signs, signals, writing, images, sounds, data or
intelligence”([18 U.S.C.
§2510(12))](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/2510): an almost
perfect description of email. The result is that any email on a
provider’s server that has been opened or is more than six months old
may have its contents accessed via such a subpoena.

 > [18 U.S.C. §2705(a)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/2705)
provides for a renewable delay of notification for a period of 90 days
if notification may have an “adverse result.”

### FISA & the PATRIOT Act–Ambiguity Abounds

Thus far, the policies we have discussed actually apply to anyone’s
electronic communications, not only those of journalists. In fact, the
only part of ECPA that makes journalist-relevant stipulations is the
controversial “business records” section of the PATRIOT Act (215–now [50
U.S.C. §1861](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/50/1861)). Though
section 1(a) of the law allows the FBI to “require production of any
tangible things” as part of an investigation to obtain “foreign
intelligence information,” this only applies “provided that such an
investigation is not conducted solely upon activities protected by the
First Amendment”[[50 U.S.C.
§1861(1)(a)](http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/50/1861)].
Unfortunately, this latter characterization is described only in the
guidelines of the Attorney General. Though these guidelines [have been
revised](http://www.justice.gov/iso/opa/resources/2202013712162851796893.pdf)
and their protections expanded<sup>[16](footnotes/README.html)</sup>
since the AP phone records scandal in the spring of 2013, these
guidelines do not carry the force of law; journalists and their
organizations have no legal recourse if they are breached.

 > As [Eve Burton](http://www.hearst.com/about/bios/eve-burton) points
out: [“The AP cannot march into court and sue the
DOJ.”](http://www.cjr.org/cloud_control/ap_phone_records_seizure_revea.php?page=all)

### Why Metadata Matters

> “Although the law provides less protection for metadata than content,
> metadata can be even more revelatory than content itself.”  
> –Susan Landau<sup>[17](footnotes/README.html)</sup>

While the target of the AP phone records collection situation is still
uncertain, the implications of metadata collection for journalists are
clearly illustrated in the cases of both James Rosen and James Risen,
whose alleged sources were first identified by law enforcement based on
the analysis of telephone, email, and other communications’ metadata.
Coupled with the uncertain standing of reporters’ privilege (discussed
below), these cases are particularly troubling as there are indications
that they are the early threads of a trend, as suggested by a department
of justice official:

> “As a general matter, prosecutions of those who leaked classified
> information to reporters have been rare, due, in part, to the inherent
> challenges involved in identifying the person responsible for the
> illegal disclosure and in compiling the evidence necessary to prove it
> beyond a reasonable doubt.”<sup>[18](footnotes/README.html)</sup>

**What makes up metadata?**

### What’s Next

In recent months, conflicting conclusions about the constitutionality of
metadata collection by the government have been evident in decisions
issued by various circuit courts. Specifically, in [*ACLU v.
Clapper*](https://www.aclu.org/national-security/aclu-v-clapper-legal-documents)
(2014)<sup>[19](footnotes/README.html)</sup> the 2rd Circuit held that
metadata is not private, and that under FISA following connections up to
three links away from the target part is acceptable. In December of
2013, however, the opposite ruling was reached by the D.C. Circuit in
the case of [*Klayman v.
Obama*](https://ecf.dcd.uscourts.gov/cgi-bin/show_public_doc?2013cv0851-48).
As of April, 2014, however, the Supreme Court refused to hear
Klayman<sup>[20](footnotes/README.html)</sup> , meaning that it is
likely to be some time before more clarity on these issues is gained.