Privilege & Source Protection
-----------------------------

### Testifying Against Sources

At the federal level, the question of reporters’ privilege remains, in
the words of one prominent law firm “in
disarray.”<sup>[21](footnotes/README.html)</sup>

The Supreme Court recently rejected James Risen’s
appeal,<sup>[22](footnotes/README.html)</sup> though without much
explanation. Nonetheless, there are still a number of directly
conflicting decisions in courts at the district level. At the core of
these conflicts are ongoing gaps in interpretations of 1972’s
[*Branzburg v.
Hayes*](http://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/408/665#writing-USSC_CR_0408_0665_ZO)–the
most recent Supreme Court decision related to reporters’ privilege.
Though in *Branzburg* the reporter’s petition to quash a subpoena for
appearance before a criminal grand jury was ultimately denied on the
facts of the case, a concurring opinion by Justice Powell is sometimes
interpreted as confirming the existence of *some* reportorial privilege,
because in it [Branzburg v. Hayes,
Concurring](http://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/408/665#writing-USSC_CR_0408_0665_ZC)<span>he
asserts the importance of “striking the proper balance between freedom
of the press and the obligation of all citizens to give relevant
testimony.”</span> While the Risen decision speaks poorly for the
promise of any federal reporter’s privilege, even in cases where it has
been upheld, *Branzburg* makes clear that any privilege applies only to
journalists, not their sources:

> “We note first that the privilege claimed is that of the reporter, not
> the informant, and that, if the authorities independently identify the
> informant, neither his own reluctance to testify nor the objection of
> the newsman would shield him from grand jury inquiry, whatever the
> impact on the flow of news or on his future usefulness as a secret
> source of information.”<sup>[23](footnotes/README.html)</sup>

Thus, reporters wishing to protect their sources must do everything in
their power to prevent their being independently identified by law
enforcement, as once this has been accomplished the source may be
vulnerable to prosecution. In point of fact, reporter testimony often
may be unnecessary to identify sources, as explicitly noted in Risen’s
case. In granting Risen’s motion to quash his subpoena to appear before
a grand jury, Judge Leonie M. Brinkema wrote that Risen’s testimony was
probably unnecessary as the government already had [“numerous telephone
records, e-mail messages, computer files and testimony that strongly
indicates that Sterling was Risen’s
source.”](https://archive.org/details/229733-judge-leonie-brinkemas-ruling-quashing-subpoena)

As noted, forty-nine states and the District of Columbia, meanwhile,
have case law or legislation that offer journalists some protection from
being compelled to identify their sources. As the foregoing discussion
illustrates, however, the authorities rarely need to obtain this
information via reporters’ testimony when journalists have been
communicating with their sources digitally–the metadata associated with
these communications is often sufficient to identify who is speaking
with whom. Because of this, it is increasingly likely that even where
some form of journalist privilege exists, reporters will never get the
chance to invoke it; the kind of metadata collection/analysis being
conducted at the federal level is known to take place at the state and
local level as well.<sup>[24](footnotes/README.html)</sup>

 > “This isn’t the NSA asking for information.” -Senator Edward J.
Markey (D-MA)

### Data and Testimony–Where Encryption Assists

Metadata and direct testimony, of course, are not the only means by
which the authorities can obtain information about a journalist’s
sources. Searches of digital storage, such as a computers, hard drives
and mobile phones, may reveal source identities and
more.<sup>[25](footnotes/README.html)</sup> Where the data in question
has been encrypted, however, protecting it is still possible in certain
circumstances.

A recent Seventh Circuit ruling held that forcing a defendant to decrypt
the contents of a drive to which he had not already admitted having
access and control was likely a violation of his Fifth Amendment rights.
In some cases, simply requiring the act of decryption has been classed
merely as “production” of materials–similar to handing over the key to a
lockbox–and not subject to Fifth Amendment protection. Yet the Seventh
Circuit pointed out that in some cases the act of production “has
communicative aspects of its own”:

> “…compliance with a subpoena tacitly concedes: (1) the existence of
> the documents, (2) their possession or control by the accused, and (3)
> the accused’s belief that the documents are
> authentic.”<sup>[26](footnotes/README.html)</sup>

Thus, unless the government can “establish its knowledge of the
existence, possession, and authenticity of the subpoenaed documents with
‘reasonable particularity’ ” one may be able to resist a subpoena that
requires decrypting data in response to a subpoena. As indicated in this
same opinion, however, Fifth Amendment protections can only be applied
to communications which “relate a factual assertion or disclose
information,” and do not generally apply to actions such as standing in
a lineup or providing a handwriting sample. As a result, decryption
mechanisms that require only a fingerprint or facial recognition may not
afford the same level of legal
protection.<sup>[27](footnotes/README.html)</sup>